src/app/eo-summary/_articles/executive-order-restoring-accountability-policy-influencing-positions-within-the-federal.mdx, before:

# executive-order-restoring-accountability-policy-influencing-positions-within-the-federal
# Analysis of the Executive Order
This Executive Order, signed by Donald J. Trump on January 20, 2025, seeks to reinstate and modify Executive Order 13957, originally issued on October 21, 2020, which created "Schedule F" in the excepted service. The new order renames Schedule F to "Schedule Policy/Career" but maintains the core principle of making it easier to remove civil servants in policy-related roles.

## Key Points:

- **Reinstatement of Executive Order 13957:** The order immediately reinstates the controversial Schedule F (now Policy/Career) framework, which aims to reclassify civil servants in policy-related roles, making them easier to dismiss. This is done by moving them out of the competitive service and into the excepted service.
- **Amendments to Executive Order 13957:**

    - Renames Schedule F to "Schedule Policy/Career."
    - Removes a section of text regarding the necessity for "excepting such positions."
    - Adds language providing for the application of Civil Service Rule 6.3(a) to Schedule Policy/Career positions, which pertains to probationary periods and appointments in the excepted service.
    - Clarifies that career positions are the focus of Schedule Policy/Career.
    - Adds additional categories for inclusion in Schedule Policy/Career, including those who supervise employees in Schedule Policy/Career or those whose duties the Director indicates as appropriate.
    - Changes the language to make it clear that the Director will recommend positions for Schedule Policy/Career to the President.
    - Clarifies that while employees are not required to support the President, they are required to implement the President's policies "faithfully" or face dismissal.
- **Conforming Regulatory Changes:** Directs the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) to rescind any changes made by the final rule of April 9, 2024, "Upholding Civil Service Protections and Merit System Principles." Also, it suspends specific regulations until the rescission is complete.
- **Additional Positions:** Directs OPM to provide guidance within 30 days for additional positions to be considered for inclusion in Schedule Policy/Career.
- **Revocation:** Revokes Executive Order 14003, which protected the Federal workforce. It also instructs agencies to suspend, revise, or rescind actions taken under that previous order.

## Areas of Concern:

- **Undermining Civil Service Protections:** The core purpose of this order is to undermine civil service protections and make it easier to remove career employees from policymaking positions. By reclassifying positions into the "Schedule Policy/Career," employees are stripped of due process rights, including the ability to appeal terminations.
- **Politicization of the Civil Service:** By requiring employees to "faithfully implement administration policies to the best of their ability," the order creates an environment where civil servants could be pressured to act in line with the administration’s agenda rather than in the best interest of the public.
- **Removal of Protections for Whistleblowers:** By revoking Executive Order 14003, this new order potentially removes protections for whistleblowers and those who raise legitimate concerns about policies, leading to a chilling effect on dissent within the federal government.
- **Abuse of Power:** The increased ability to dismiss civil servants without cause could be used to remove career employees who are not perceived as loyal to the current administration, thus politicizing the civil service.
- **Separation of Powers:** While the order cites the President's authority over the executive branch, the extensive control the President has over the civil service creates an imbalance of power within the government and allows him to bypass the checks and balances of other branches of government.
- **Potential for Abuse:** The broad language used in sections 5(c)(vi) and (vii), which allows for the inclusion of those "supervising employees in Schedule Policy/Career positions" or with duties "the Director otherwise indicates may be appropriate," grants substantial discretionary power to the Director of OPM and lacks clear limitations, opening the door for abuse.
- **Rule 6.3(a) implications:** By adding "Civil Service Rule 6.3(a)", the order allows for employees in these positions to be terminated much easier due to lack of performance without recourse.

## Constitutional and Legal Implications:

- **Merit System Principles:** The Pendleton Act of 1883 established a merit-based civil service designed to ensure that government employees are hired and promoted based on competence rather than political affiliation. This order appears to undermine the merit system principle, potentially violating the intent of this law.
- **Due Process:** The removal of civil service protections and the stripping of appeal rights could be challenged as a violation of due process rights under the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments. While not every government employee has a constitutionally protected property interest in their job, the scope of the power this executive order claims should be carefully scrutinized under the Constitution.
- **First Amendment:** The "faithful implementation" clause in Section 3(f)(ii) could potentially restrict free speech and dissent within the civil service, potentially infringing upon First Amendment rights if interpreted too broadly.

## Potential Impacts:

- **Instability and Inefficiency:** Removing experienced career employees and replacing them with less qualified individuals could disrupt continuity, reduce efficiency, and impact the effectiveness of government agencies.
- **Reduced Expertise and Institutional Knowledge:** The dismissal of experienced civil servants could lead to the loss of institutional knowledge, negatively impacting the government’s ability to serve the public effectively.
- **Erosion of Trust:** The politicization of the civil service can reduce public trust in government institutions.

## Summary:

This Executive Order attempts to reinstate and modify the controversial Schedule F, renaming it Schedule Policy/Career, with the explicit intent of making it easier to dismiss career employees in policy-influencing positions. The order raises significant concerns regarding civil service protections, the politicization of the civil service, and the potential for abuse of power. It could undermine the merit system and due process rights, as well as reduce public trust in government. Its implementation may face strong legal challenges.

Commit message:

Resolve some formatting issues and get metadata working.

src/app/eo-summary/_articles/executive-order-restoring-accountability-policy-influencing-positions-within-the-federal.mdx, after:

export const metadata = {
  title:
    "Executive Order Restoring Accountability in Policy Influencing Positions",
  description:
    "Analysis of the Executive Order Restoring Accountability in Policy Influencing Positions",
};

export const docLink = "https://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/node/375945";

# Analysis of the Executive Order

This Executive Order, signed by Donald J. Trump on January 20, 2025, seeks to reinstate and modify Executive Order 13957, originally issued on October 21, 2020, which created "Schedule F" in the excepted service. The new order renames Schedule F to "Schedule Policy/Career" but maintains the core principle of making it easier to remove civil servants in policy-related roles.

## Key Points:

- **Reinstatement of Executive Order 13957:** The order immediately reinstates the controversial Schedule F (now Policy/Career) framework, which aims to reclassify civil servants in policy-related roles, making them easier to dismiss. This is done by moving them out of the competitive service and into the excepted service.
- **Amendments to Executive Order 13957:**
  - Renames Schedule F to "Schedule Policy/Career."
  - Removes a section of text regarding the necessity for "excepting such positions."
  - Adds language providing for the application of Civil Service Rule 6.3(a) to Schedule Policy/Career positions, which pertains to probationary periods and appointments in the excepted service.
  - Clarifies that career positions are the focus of Schedule Policy/Career.
  - Adds additional categories for inclusion in Schedule Policy/Career, including those who supervise employees in Schedule Policy/Career or those whose duties the Director indicates as appropriate.
  - Changes the language to make it clear that the Director will recommend positions for Schedule Policy/Career to the President.
  - Clarifies that while employees are not required to support the President, they are required to implement the President's policies "faithfully" or face dismissal.
- **Conforming Regulatory Changes:** Directs the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) to rescind any changes made by the final rule of April 9, 2024, "Upholding Civil Service Protections and Merit System Principles." Also, it suspends specific regulations until the rescission is complete.
- **Additional Positions:** Directs OPM to provide guidance within 30 days for additional positions to be considered for inclusion in Schedule Policy/Career.
- **Revocation:** Revokes Executive Order 14003, which protected the Federal workforce. It also instructs agencies to suspend, revise, or rescind actions taken under that previous order.

## Areas of Concern:

- **Undermining Civil Service Protections:** The core purpose of this order is to undermine civil service protections and make it easier to remove career employees from policymaking positions. By reclassifying positions into the "Schedule Policy/Career," employees are stripped of due process rights, including the ability to appeal terminations.
- **Politicization of the Civil Service:** By requiring employees to "faithfully implement administration policies to the best of their ability," the order creates an environment where civil servants could be pressured to act in line with the administration’s agenda rather than in the best interest of the public.
- **Removal of Protections for Whistleblowers:** By revoking Executive Order 14003, this new order potentially removes protections for whistleblowers and those who raise legitimate concerns about policies, leading to a chilling effect on dissent within the federal government.
- **Abuse of Power:** The increased ability to dismiss civil servants without cause could be used to remove career employees who are not perceived as loyal to the current administration, thus politicizing the civil service.
- **Separation of Powers:** While the order cites the President's authority over the executive branch, the extensive control the President has over the civil service creates an imbalance of power within the government and allows him to bypass the checks and balances of other branches of government.
- **Potential for Abuse:** The broad language used in sections 5(c)(vi) and (vii), which allows for the inclusion of those "supervising employees in Schedule Policy/Career positions" or with duties "the Director otherwise indicates may be appropriate," grants substantial discretionary power to the Director of OPM and lacks clear limitations, opening the door for abuse.
- **Rule 6.3(a) implications:** By adding "Civil Service Rule 6.3(a)", the order allows for employees in these positions to be terminated much easier due to lack of performance without recourse.

## Constitutional and Legal Implications:

- **Merit System Principles:** The Pendleton Act of 1883 established a merit-based civil service designed to ensure that government employees are hired and promoted based on competence rather than political affiliation. This order appears to undermine the merit system principle, potentially violating the intent of this law.
- **Due Process:** The removal of civil service protections and the stripping of appeal rights could be challenged as a violation of due process rights under the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments. While not every government employee has a constitutionally protected property interest in their job, the scope of the power this executive order claims should be carefully scrutinized under the Constitution.
- **First Amendment:** The "faithful implementation" clause in Section 3(f)(ii) could potentially restrict free speech and dissent within the civil service, potentially infringing upon First Amendment rights if interpreted too broadly.

## Potential Impacts:

- **Instability and Inefficiency:** Removing experienced career employees and replacing them with less qualified individuals could disrupt continuity, reduce efficiency, and impact the effectiveness of government agencies.
- **Reduced Expertise and Institutional Knowledge:** The dismissal of experienced civil servants could lead to the loss of institutional knowledge, negatively impacting the government’s ability to serve the public effectively.
- **Erosion of Trust:** The politicization of the civil service can reduce public trust in government institutions.

## Summary:

This Executive Order attempts to reinstate and modify the controversial Schedule F, renaming it Schedule Policy/Career, with the explicit intent of making it easier to dismiss career employees in policy-influencing positions. The order raises significant concerns regarding civil service protections, the politicization of the civil service, and the potential for abuse of power. It could undermine the merit system and due process rights, as well as reduce public trust in government. Its implementation may face strong legal challenges.
